As you probably all know,
we jammed a new GCC 3.3
compiler this week at the show,
and today what I would like to do
is introducing you to that compiler,
answering any questions you may have that
are preventing you from moving forward,
and I encourage you to move to 3.3.
Also, I want to introduce you to
one of our partners from IBM.
We work very closely in terms
of delivering the 3.3 compiler,
particularly focused on the
G5 and the new G5 system,
and also leave you with some
idea of future directions for us.
So we had a challenge in putting
together the 3.3 compiler.
We wanted to deliver a very
robust compiler because we
know that's what you expect.
We wanted to address compile speed.
We've heard very much from you in
terms of compile speed and comparing
us against the Code Warrior compiler.
And also in terms of code quality
because we were introducing
a brand new system this week,
a G5 system,
and we needed to have terrific
optimizations for that system
coming out of the chute.
Well, that's a very hard problem.
I've worked in the compiler area
for quite a number of years,
and usually you get to pick two of
those three and you can deliver either
a robust compiler with a lot of great
code quality or you can deliver a
robust compiler that's really fast.
But to try and deliver a
compiler that's really that
meets all three of those goals.
This is a real challenge.
So I want to talk a little
bit about why we were able
to accomplish that challenge,
and I think you'll see that when
you install and use GCC 3.3.
First of all, as you know,
it's based on the GCC,
the Free Software Foundation technology,
and today that technology is very mature
and stable and continuing to evolve.
Primarily from the advent of
Linux systems and Linux system
vendors putting together compiler
production release compilers.
Since that time, the GCC compilers really
matured significantly.
There are billions of lines of
code that have been put through it.
We build our own Mac OS X operating
system with GCC compiler.
We have very extensive test suite,
something on the order of 30,000
tests a day and growing all the time.
So just a very robust experience,
and I want to assure you that
when you install the 3.3 compiler,
you will see the same thing.
One example is one of our early
seeds for 3.3 was one of you
folks with an application of about
26 million lines of C++ code.
That entire application was migrated
to 3.3 with essentially no problems.
So what does Apple contribute?
Because we also have been
putting a big effort in.
And I want to tell you that
we're a very active member of
the free software community.
We have experienced engineers on
staff that have worked in that
community for quite a while.
We are an active maintainer.
The Free Software Foundation has
actually recognized some of our
efforts and they have made Darwin a
reference platform for GCC releases.
Something that is really fantastic.
New optimizations, as I mentioned,
G5 was really important
to us for this release.
This system, as you've probably seen in
some other presentations,
is an order of magnitude more
complex to deal with than the G4.
And our mission, part of our mission,
is to make that happen for you so
that you don't have to do all of the
work of extracting the power from G5.
So we've done quite a
bit of optimization.
You'll hear some about that today.
You'll hear some from our partner
IBM who worked with us on that.
As I mentioned,
compilation speed is important.
And so we made that a high
priority within our organization.
And I will show you some of
the performance improvements
in terms of compilation speed.
And finally, just general maintenance.
Our customers report problems.
We fix them.
We put them into the community.
And so we're very active
and correct members,
if you will, of the community.
So let me get into talking about
the three things that we focused on
for this release besides robustness.
In the language feature area,
as you know,
GCC is already very compliant
with the ISO and ANSI standards.
And so it's mature in that way,
but it's not 100% compliant.
And so it continues to grow.
And in this release,
you'll see some of that,
particularly with respect to now
being able to identify incorrect
code that may have slipped by in
earlier releases of the Compiler.
We've also added a feature in
Panther wide character support,
a missing feature.
Now, as you know,
within our own frameworks
and within Apple,
we encourage you to use Unicode,
which is a much more powerful means
of dealing with wide characters.
But we have heard your desire
to have applications more easily
ported into our environment.
And in some cases,
that requires a lot of work.
So that will be there
with the Panther release.
You will not have it with Jaguar.
Objective C and Objective C++, of course,
we maintain and we do
enhancement in this.
One of the problems that you
have told us about is that we
did not have an exception model,
particularly for Objective C.
We've added that.
That's also available in conjunction
with the Panther OS release.
Finally, and I know you've heard some of
these things in other forums,
but finally, we've added another
migration tool for you,
which is the ability to use
inline assembly or port inline
assembly from the Code Warrior.
So completely compatible
with Code Warrior,
other than bugs you may find
since it's a brand new feature.
But I think it's pretty robust.
We've ported quite a bit of code with it.
So, compatibility from release to release
is always a concern and an issue.
The main thing I'd like to point out
to you is what you see here is a very
short list of issues to deal with.
So, we're compatible in many, many ways.
One of the things that you will
want to do though is that you will
want to rebuild your C++ apps.
A necessity in terms of making
some enhancements to C++,
we've had an ABI change.
And so, you simply just need to
recompile all of your C++ apps.
[Transcript missing]
The other thing that we have done
within GCC 3.3 is that in looking
at the migration of some code,
people were getting tripped up
a little bit with the flags.
We had certain flags that
you use for CPP Precomp.
We have some others for PFE,
and now we have PCH flags.
And so if you were in your
development environment,
getting those flags corrected was
recognizing that you needed to
correct them even was a problem.
And so we've made the use of
invalid flags for the particular
compiler you're using a warning.
So you'll get a heads up.
If you see warnings from compiler
flags now that you hadn't seen before,
you should deal with those.
They're really there to
try and help you out.
One of the things that we get as a
result of deprecating CPP Precomp
is that CPP Precomp was built on a
preprocessor model which was KNR based.
And so you had to flip some
switches within the compiler if
you wanted to actually use the
ANSI standards C preprocessor.
Now that we no longer
have that encumbrance,
we have made the default
CPP Precomp CPP preprocessor
the ANSI standard preprocessor.
It aligns us with all other GCC compilers
that are being delivered today.
And finally,
one other flag that I would just
warn you about because we've seen
some resulting difficulty with this
as well is the no standard include
flag was originally intended to
not look in any system directories.
We found that we actually had a
problem with the implementation
in the 3.1 compiler and it,
in fact, was looking and finding header
files in a system directory.
Well, that's corrected now.
And so if, in fact,
you were taking advantage of
the fact that certain system
directories were being searched,
then you'll need to
deal with that as well.
[Transcript missing]
This makes the assumption that header
files are a significant portion of
your actual compilation process.
And that's certainly true if you're
using large frameworks like Carbon or
Cocoa or AppKit or others like that.
So your code is typically a very small
portion of what is actually compiled
when you're building files like that.
To make the best use of
pre-compiled headers,
it works best if you can actually
identify a common set of headers
that are used by all of the files
that you're building in a project.
What you can do with that is that
you can create a prefix header,
as we call it,
which is a pre-compiled header that
contains those common header files.
Then you simply include that
prefix header in the header file.
And that prefix header in your file that
you're building and the compiler will
restore a significant amount of state,
bypass all of that compilation process,
and move straight into
compiling the rest of the code.
The next feature is
predictive compilation.
And I know that this has been
talked about a little bit
in the Xcode discussions.
I have a picture maybe that
will help you understand.
In predictive compilation,
we once again are making the assumption
that the header files are a big
portion of your compilation process.
And furthermore,
if you're going to modify a header,
you do that in the context of
modifying that header file,
not the source file you're editing.
And so what happens with
predictive compilation is that
when you begin editing a file,
the compiler in the background begins the
compilation process on the header files.
And it will proceed up until the
point where your code begins,
the code that you're working on.
Then once you save that code,
the compiler proceeds on and predicts.
And predictively compiles
that file for you.
You can see in the timeline that
I provided here a representation of that.
[Transcript missing]
The middle point,
which we offered in December tool set,
primarily was the addition of being able
to use the dual processor on your tower.
So that using both processors
we were able to significantly
reduce the amount of compile time.
Still had PFE though.
With the introduction this
week of GCC 3.0 and Xcode,
PCH is the new capability and
you'll see on the chart there
the performance over and above
PFE we're able to obtain with PCH.
I wanted to draw your attention
though to one other point on there
and that's the green one down at the
bottom that says distributed build.
This is the result of building this
application with six Xcode components.
So we have two Xserves,
dual processor Xserves.
Six because we had them available.
Actually, don't know that this app
required the use of all six.
But essentially you have a
means now of adding horsepower
to get faster performance,
even above dual processor.
So code quality,
and I mentioned that we had
a big focus on code quality,
particularly with respect
to the G5 processor.
When you're in the process of trying to
focus on code quality within compilers,
probably the most important tool
you can have is a real benchmark.
And that's a benchmark that is
in a harness so it's easy to run.
It provides reproducible results.
It represents applications
similar to what you deal with.
And prior to G5,
we had used an internal benchmark
that was called Skidmarks.
And Skidmarks was composed of kernels
of code from various applications
that we felt were important in Apple.
When we reached G5, though,
we had a problem.
The problem was that not only were those
files small enough to fit into cache
so that they didn't really represent
true applications on the system,
but also they weren't self-checking
such that if we broke an optimization,
the code might still run and
produce incorrect results.
We didn't have an idea of that.
We just knew how fast it ran.
So we looked around in the industry
and we chose the spec benchmark.
There are pluses and minuses
with the spec benchmark.
You can argue as to whether
they're representative of
Macintosh applications or not,
but we determined that they
were close enough that we
could make some good progress.
And, oh, by the way,
we also needed to produce spec
numbers for this new processor.
So spec represents 12 integer benchmarks,
14 floating point benchmarks.
They're real applications that have
been encapsulated into the test bench,
and they run in a harness and they're
predictable and validate their results.
So let me just show you the results of
G5 performance with the spec benchmarks.
And what I'm comparing here is our 3.1
compiler versus our 3.3 compiler today.
So the compiler you're using today
versus the one that hopefully you'll
be using later on this afternoon.
You can see from specint,
and this is an aggregate across
the 12 benchmarks in specint,
that we actually have a 17%
performance increase over what
we're able to extract from the 3.1
Correspondingly for Floating Point,
and this is a Floating
Point machine as has been noted
in almost every presentation.
In Floating Point,
we're able to get 30% better
performance than we can with
the 3.1 compiler on a G5,
and this is a single processor G5 2 GHz.
So what does this mean for you in terms
of how can you take advantage and build
your code for the G5 and get performance?
Well, there are several situations
that you may be dealing with.
First of all,
you may have an app that you want to
run on more systems than just the G5.
You may want to have that app which has
some computationally intensive code,
but by and large,
the rest of the app is not dependent
upon the performance of a G5 system.
And so you might break that app up
such that you put the computational
intensive portion into a runtime library.
You tune that very heavily for G5 and
leave the rest of your code as G4 or G3,
and you can produce runtime libraries
for each category of system.
You can do that by turning on the
MCPU Frag and getting G5 instructions
and M-Tune and getting G5 scheduling.
Let's suppose though that your app also
uses long longs or double data types.
Then you may want to take advantage of
the 64-bit arithmetic power of the G5.
And what we have provided if you use
the Empower PC64 switch is that you
actually enable 64-bit arithmetic and
it does amazing things then with your
long long arithmetic or your doubles.
And loading and storing 64 bits
and doing arithmetic on that.
Believe me, you'll applaud once you've
had a chance to taste it,
if you're using that.
[Transcript missing]
So let me call David Edelsohn
up to the stage.
David and others within IBM have worked
very heavily with us on optimizing
for the G5 and the 3.3 release.
David?
Thanks very much, Ron.
So my name is David Edelsohn,
and I work at IBM Research.
My main focus there is on open
source issues and technology,
particularly GCC.
I'm glad to see so many people here
at the conference interested in GCC.
So first let me give you a
little idea of what I'm going to
talk about in this presentation.
I'm going to talk about the PowerPC 970
processor and issues in the processor
that are important for a compiler to
target to get the highest performance.
We're also going to talk about how
we have optimized GCC to extract
that best performance on this
processor that Apple is now using.
And we're going to mention a little
bit about the future optimizations
that are going to be coming down the
pike in later releases of GCC and about
how IBM and Apple are both working
together with the open source community
to engage them and produce the best
compiler for the PowerPC processors.
So let's start with a little bit of
information about this processor.
This big step in processor performance.
We now have a 64-bit
PowerPC processor on the desktop.
The PowerPC architecture was designed
from day one as a 64-bit architecture.
The previous implementations
have been the 32-bit subset,
and now we have an implementation
in Apple's computers that use
the full 64-bit architecture.
And this architecture has instructions
that operate on both 32-bit
size data and 64-bit size data.
And the architecture is based on the
32-bit size data and 64-bit size data.
And in 64-bit mode,
when it's operating on
twice the amount of data,
and it's the same performance whether
you're in the 32-bit mode or 64-bit mode,
same latency,
the same speed of the instructions,
and you're operating on
twice the amount of data.
This processor has a lot of
resources available at its
disposal to attack whatever
application you have to throw at it.
It has two complete symmetric
floating point units.
It has two symmetric load store units.
It has two almost symmetric instruction
integer units in this processor.
And these are a lot of capabilities
now to bring to bear on your problems.
And this increase in resources
is an increase in performance
for your application.
So this is a pictorial depiction
of the processor core in the 970.
I just want you to have a
visual representation for this
processor in the upcoming slides.
So let's go through and talk about how an
instruction flows through this processor.
First, instructions are fetched from the
L1 cache into the instruction queue.
And in this instruction queue,
the instructions are then decoded
and placed into the dispatch groups.
And up to five instructions can be
dispatched at a time to the various
instruction function unit issue queues.
from the issue queues,
you can dispatch to any of these
12 function units in the processor.
So this is a lot of resources,
a very powerful chip,
a lot of complexity that the
compiler needs to harness to
give you the best performance.
[Transcript missing]
So I want to make sure that
you understand that while this
processor has a lot of capabilities
that the compiler can leverage,
that this processor works very
well with any sort of code
that you're going to throw at.
That if you're working on G3 or G4 code,
there's a lot of dynamic capability
in the processor to extract the
most performance out of that.
You can work with the compiler to
achieve the maximum performance
and get that little extra percent,
but if you're working on an
application that needs to be
targeted at G3 and G4 and the new G5,
that application will scream
on all of these processors.
And it will scream on the G5 as well.
So this processor will not just
fall down if presented with G4 code.
So how can you help the compiler to
produce better code now that we've
discussed what the compiler -- what
we've done in the compiler groups to
try to help tune it for this processor?
First of all,
one thing that you need to do is to
make sure that this -- that the compiler
can be as aggressive as possible
in its transformations of the code.
And one of these areas is to try to make
sure that the compiler doesn't need to
be more conservative than it need be.
An area where this is
important is in aliasing.
That's where the compiler cannot tell
or where two different memory -- two
different accesses to memory could
potentially -- two variables could
point to the same place in memory.
And so if the compiler
cannot distinguish this,
the compiler needs to be more
conservative to ensure that it's
going to perform the calculations
in the appropriate order.
So what you can do to allow the
compiler to see and understand more of
the procedure that you're working on
is to use local variables and to avoid
taking the addresses of variables.
And this also includes areas where
the calling convention may implicitly
pass something by an address,
because then the compiler needs
to sort of throw up its hands
if it can't fully understand the
consequences of what the -- something
may be happening behind its back.
So that's one area where you can help
the compiler produce more effective code.
Another area is in simplifying loops,
where if you can make this loop as simple
as possible and as direct as possible,
the compiler has much more
opportunity to make it more effective.
Thank you.
So you can take the loop
and do the same thing.
You can also do the same thing that
you would do if you had a loop,
but you have to make a loop.
So the compiler needs to be
able to make transformations
that will improve performance.
One example of this is to not have
changes in flow control inside the loop.
So, for instance,
if you have a loop that has
a branch inside the loop,
if it's possible,
it would be better to move that branch,
that conditional,
outside of the loop and actually
duplicate the loop in both
branches of the conditional.
And that allows the compiler to then
optimize each of those loops much more
effectively when it can better understand
exactly what's going to happen.
Thank you.
Another area is indexes into arrays.
Again, try to have as simplified an
index as possible so that,
again, the compiler can understand what's
going on and make transformations
with prefetching and other sorts
of optimizations that would
be much more effective in the
throughput of this processor.
And finally is obeying the type rules.
The type rules are something that is
essentially an agreement between the
programmer and the language about how
you're going to use the various types.
And if you use the types appropriately
and don't start changing accesses
behind the compiler's back in
ways that it doesn't expect,
you can use the most
aggressive optimizations,
as Ron mentioned,
and get the best performance
from your program.
So let me talk a little bit about
where this technology came from.
That a lot of this work that
we've been doing comes from IBM's
vast experience in developing
compilers over the past decades,
including some of the earliest
compilers for computers.
So we have a worldwide research
and development organization
that has been brought to bear in
partnership with Apple in improving
this compiler for the G5 processor.
Some of this involves taking the
technology that IBM has developed
for its Power 4 processor from
which the 970 was derived and used
in developing IBM's own compiler,
taking that knowledge,
taking that experience,
and driving that technology and
that understanding into GCC,
so leveraging all of that
history of development.
And we're trying to -- using all
of that to exploit this processor
and give Apple and its customers
the best performance possible.
Now let me mention a little bit about
where GCC is going in the future.
There are a lot of very exciting
optimizations that are going to be
included in the compiler in the future,
which will yet further enhance
the performance of this processor.
We have a new register
allocator that is coming.
There is improvements in
the instruction scheduler,
which will allow even better
ability to model the complicated
dispatch groups that I mentioned.
There is work on software pipelining,
which will help improve the
floating point performance.
There is work on an
SSA optimization infrastructure,
which allows one to describe the
program in a way that allows much
more aggressive optimizations.
This will allow easier implementation
of loop optimizations and auto
vectorization in the future.
Further work on inter-procedural
optimizations to be able to,
again, have the compiler understand
more of the program,
understand what's going
to happen with aliasing,
and work past limitations that the
programmer may not have intended.
Profile directed feedback,
so that the compiler can reorder the
instructions to take advantage of
how the application is actually run
with the data sets that you have.
And of course,
continued improvement in the compiler
speed to more rapidly generate the code.
So all of this stems from this
partnership that IBM and Apple have in
developing and further improving GCC.
We are both very committed to
GCC and to the open source community.
There are a large number of developers
for GCC inside Apple and inside IBM.
I am a member of the GCC steering
committee and a member of Ron's team
is on the GCC steering committee.
I'm one of the maintainers of
the PowerPC port of the compiler
and a member of Ron's team is my
co-maintainer on the compiler.
And we are fully engaged with
this community to help design the
future of this compiler and taking
a leadership position to make sure
that this is the best compiler for
Apple systems and for the PowerPC.
[Transcript missing]
Actually,
it's a pretty exciting time for us.
In the compiler world,
when you're presented with
a challenge like this,
it just makes your day
or makes your year.
Future directions.
Well, as you can see,
we've just embarked on this
journey with the new processor and
extracting the performance from that.
And we really consider our role to be one
of trying to make this processor work for
you without you having to jump through
hoops or go through a lot of gyrations.
Right now, we're telling you,
please do a few gyrations if you
want to get the performance out.
But we're working, as David showed you,
on any number of areas within
the GCC community to take the
optimization capabilities of the
GNU Compiler to the next level.
We also don't consider our work
done in terms of compile speed.
I think you will agree we've
made some really dramatic
progress in the past year.
And if I were you,
I would expect from us that we'll make
as good a progress in the coming year
because we're going to nail performance.
That's really important.
And we want to remove this
compiler from being an obstruction
to you getting your work done.
In terms of language features,
we'll move along at a slower
pace because the language is
moving at a slower pace today.
But you can count on us continuing
to move towards full compliance.
with the ANSI and ISO standards.
So, this,
even though it's being jammed today,
is being offered to you as a
part of the Xcode tools package.
There's documentation in that
package that you can reach.
There's the release notes.
One piece of documentation that you'll
probably want to look for is in terms
of performance tuning your code.
And I would encourage you
to attend the session,
which occurs the next
day or the next week.
And I would encourage you
to attend the session,
which occurs the next
day or the next week.
Okay.
Anyway, there's a performance session
during the next period of time,
and I would encourage you to attend that.
I was at the CHUD session
that preceded this,
and I was happy to see
an overflow room there.
We've got some dramatic capabilities
with our tools to help you improve
the performance of your code.
If you have contact
that you want to make,
Gafi DiGiorgi,
who's our technology manager,
and you'll meet him in just a moment,
his email address.
There's a feedback address
for the development tools,
and of course,
we're always looking for bug reports.
Well, I guess we're not happily
looking for bug reports,
but we appreciate the feedback.
Here's the 305 in Presidio
as the performance tools
section that I was talking to.
Some of the other sessions that you might
be interested in is Apple Script Studio,
Carbon Development, and so forth.
We encourage you tomorrow,
there will be a feedback forum where
you can come and let us know what
you would like to feedback to us and
give us your impression of the tools.